### This is our manifesto. A way to show that we are done with the systems in and out of debate. The world is dependent on our deaths as debate is dependent on our silence

**Rossie et al. 22** Sohini Chatterjee is a PhD Candidate and Vanier Scholar in the Department of Gender, Sexuality and Women’s Studies at The University of Western Ontario. She is a queer, neurodivergent, dominant-caste researcher and academic worker. Her work has recently been published in Women’s Studies: An Interdisciplinary Journal, South Asian Popular Culture, Fat Studies, among others. Her research interests revolve around trans and queer activism, critical disability studies, queer cultural studies, and resistance movements in India. Keely Grossman is a Sociology PhD student at Carleton University, which is located on unceded territories of the Algonquin Nation. She is white and a member of the blind/visually impaired community. She is interested in crip theory, disability justice, blindness studies, and activism. Rachel Jobson is a PhD candidate in Sociology at Carleton University on the unceded territories of the Algonquin Nation. She is a white, settler, queer, physically disabled and neurodivergent student researching the socio-legal construction of the nuclear family as the only sanctioned site of care outside of paid care work and institutionalization. She is an active member of the Disability Justice and Crip Cultural Collaboratory, a research lab that brings together disabled scholars, artists, designers, activists, and community members doing work on crip and disability art and culture, politics, technoscience and design, accessibility, and justice. Kristen Kowlessar is a PhD candidate in Sociology at Carleton University, located on the unceded territories of the Algonquin Nation. She is a Black, lesbian, mentally and chronically ill person researching the ways in which Thunder Bay, Ontario operates as a site for cultural meaning-making, expression, and identity formation. Their work also addresses how Thunder Bay’s racial order might be reproduced or disrupted in spaces meant to celebrate multiculturalism and what the implications are for the quality of life that Black, Indigenous, and other visibly racialized people are able to have in the city. Additionally, Kristen’s work engages with critical race conversations and whiteness, put broadly. Their work is community-based and is grounded in a decolonial antiracist feminist praxis. Additionally, she is a co-founder of the CEDAR Care Collective. River Rossi is a white, settler, trans, queer, Mad, and neurodivergent PhD student in the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Carleton University. They hold an MA in Sociology from Carleton University, and a BA (hons.) in Women’s and Gender Studies from the University of Alberta. Their past work has examined intersections of disability and AIDS activism in Canada, trauma and memory studies, and queer phenomenology. Their doctoral research expands on their work with the anti-69 network by contextually grounding the ways that settler colonialism, imperialism, and racial capitalism intertwine to produce the Canadian nation-state formation’s ongoing regulation of gender, sexuality, and disability. More broadly, their research resides in the fields of critical disability studies, Mad studies, critical trans studies, sexuality studies, settler colonial studies, anti-capitalist social movements, and social philosophy. ”Roundtable: Crip Student Solidarity in the COVID-19 Pandemic” <https://csalateral.org/section/crip-pandemic-life/roundtable-crip-student-solidarity-covid-19-pandemic-chatterjee-grossman-jobson-kowlessar-rossi/> accessed (pie)

*Edited for language*

%%As a starting point, I think that ==shared pessimism creates room for collaboration%% amongst those== who are ==considered to be== higher education’s “bad %%investments,” and those who, I argue, experience the brunt of its failures. ==These collaborative spaces are indeed possible; they presently exist in our shared struggles and our support for one another. We== may ==need to move sideways, rather than forward, through== these messy, and often ==violent spaces.==%%4 This, however, makes solidarity and radical care all the more necessary. Our strength is in our collective refusal, not our individual potential to become “good investments” and “human capitals.” RJ: Building off of this idea of moving through messy and often violent spaces, in disability discussions of disability justice, there is often much talk of “imagined futures” and the importance of thinking through the otherwise, that is, the world that is not yet here.5 Thinking of this in the context of the crip student experience in academic institutions, do you have visions for what a truly disabled and/or accessible academic institution could look like? Is this possible, or even desirable? Has the pandemic shifted or influenced your thinking on this? KK: I truly think that a progressive academia is a new one. Like, abolish this whole system and start over kind of new. Current iterations of academia are so white-knuckle, focused on our productivity and fitting our lives into academia instead of the other way around, and I feel like we need to rebuild from a much more human framework to even consider any of these futures we speak of. SC: To my mind, an accessible academia is one where students “who are disabled” are heard and our needs are centered, there is attention to intersectionality (and how it compounds vulnerabilities of variously marginalized students “who are disabled” who inhabit multiple stigmatized identities), where accessibility does not depend on disclosure6 (making even non-disabled or currently abled-bodyminded people better off because our access needs seldom remain static), there is no dearth of accountability, where conditions are created for those students “who are disabled” to thrive who have not “overcome” their disabilities and are simultaneously fighting battles on multiple fronts owing to socioeconomic disablement, sanism and ableism, racism, xenophobia, classism, casteism, queer and transphobia, and the scourge of colonialism induced structural violence and dispossession. I want the academy to be invested in meeting the needs of students who are disabled in the present. Promise of a just future that we might not live to see is insufficient. Furthermore, I want to see not just students “who are disbaled” who have cultural capital and class privilege thrive in the academy, but also those who are first generation learners/college students, who are working class, racialized, trans, Black, Indigenous, and have been repeatedly told that their disabilities would not allow them to realize their full potential. I want them to have a place in the academy even if the academy’s perception of their potential remains unrealized. I want success to be redefined in academia because normative standards of achievement gravely hurt people “who are disabled”. I want the academy to create a more level playing field by paying critical attention to equity and justice that historically excluded people who are disabled deserve and have long been demanding. The pandemic has shown how people who are disabled are rendered disposable in the everyday. Disability justice means valuing people who are disableds lives and aspirations over productivity, normativity, and profit. I dream of a future when all people who are disabled will be truly seen, heard, and understood and not just those who have been supercripped and valorized for being abled-proximate. RJ: This is interesting to me too, because it leads me to think about how this idea of mis/fitting academia into our lives rather than the other way around could dramatically shift methodology.7 What kind of insights could we gain through study that occurs within communities, study that is led by those communities, rather than siloed off outside of them and simply using them as “subjects”? How can we have non-exploitative research that centers crip experiences and knowledge if students who are disabled aren’t able to thrive or even survive in the current system? If being an “academic” requires conformity to punishing standards of productivity that exclude people “who are disabled” almost universally, isn’t our knowledge subjugated as a result? Many of us will be familiar with Mia Mingus’s work on access intimacy, and it is such an important part of how solidarity among crip/Mad/neurodivergent students has functioned for me. Mingus writes, “the power of access intimacy is that it reorients our approach from one where people “who are disabled” are expected to squeeze into able bodied people’s world, and instead calls upon able bodied people to inhabit our world.”8 While Mingus highlights that access intimacy can be hard to concisely define,9 it occurs when we encounter situations where our access needs are deeply understood, welcomed, and met by others without being framed as a burden or obligatory task. Access intimacy can be experienced with anyone, but often emerges as a form of crip solidarity experienced between sick, Mad, “people who are” disabled, and/or neurodivergent people whose lived experience has given them a complex understanding of access.10 Critically, when it occurs between folks who are disabled, this solidarity/intimacy emerges from a deep understanding of how ableism has shaped our lives and experiences and a desire to push back against that collectively. So when I think about access intimacy in my own life, and in particular in my academic life, I think about those moments of deep understanding and connection with other crip and neurodivergent grad students I have had the great joy to come to know and collaborate with. To borrow from Muñoz, utopia is quotidian, and the everyday moments of solidarity and gentleness and accountability that we offer to each other matter.11 Recently I attended an online info session for a large, prestigious scholarship that shall go unnamed. For reasons that are unclear, the hosts of the info session did not have captions enabled and insisted that there was no way to activate them after the session had started. Faced with this inaccessibility, several students in the session came together spontaneously to fashion some “DIY” captions and a transcript. One small group collaborated on live transcribing everything the hosts were saying into text in the chat. Two others created a shared Google Doc and shared the link with everyone so they could follow along on the doc in real time. One of them took screenshots of each slide that was shared and added image descriptions and wrote out the text from the slides in the document so it was legible by screen readers. Another copied and pasted the DIY captions that were being typed into the chat by others onto the Google Doc under each slide so that all of the verbal information was translated onto the written document. By the end of the session, we had a document that at least attempted to fill the gaps in accessibility that ableism created. I have had so many moments like this where an initial experience of infuriating ableism is countered by crip creativity and problem-solving. Should we have to do this? No. Is the solidarity and commitment to collective access nonetheless meaningful? Yes. KG: I believe that a truly accessible environment in academia is both possible and desirable, and there are tangible steps we can take now. For example, to make academia accessible, people “who are disabled” need to be directing their own access needs and should feel safe being in staff and faculty positions. Additionally, “people who are” disabled/Mad and other marginalized people from diverse contexts need to be invested in before they enter academia. There should be more mentorship programs that mentor students who are disabled both before they enter academia and while they are in academia led by fellow students who are disabled, faculty, and staff. That is, people who are disabled should be invested in so that they can achieve their dreams/goals. As Fritsch and Kafer outline, “people who are” disabled are often perceived to have inadequate futures by those who are non-disabled.12 Investing in people “who are disabled” would help reshape that narrative. Additionally, everything on campuses should be accessible. For example, the use of braille and tactility in all aspects of design. Websites should be screen reader accessible, including all websites pertaining to, or relevant to academia and scholarships. Course material should be provided in multiple accessible formats, including screen-reader accessible formats. Finally, I want us all to be able to be ourselves, and to be safe, supported, and accepted for the way we are. RR: In “A Manifesto,” Yasmin Nair stresses the importance of pessimism and the inevitability of failure in thinking about the future: Manifestos aren’t about hope—a word that has been denuded, stripped, corrupted of its meaning by the last ruler of this country13—but about pessimism. Like the utopias they bring forth, manifestos are birthed in the possibility of failure. They succeed not in the audacity of hope but in the audacity of despair. What is the present and the future we need to keep imagining? What is a utopia? What is the nature of our utopias? Do we still dare to have any?14 Nair’s passage raises an important question in the context of the neoliberal university: how do we make room for failure in a university that continually reminds us of the perceived need to bounce back from it? Resiliency discourses are increasingly prevalent in universities across Canada. These discourses tell us that we can bounce back from our problems. Resilience is entwined with the imperative of academic production, wherein scholars are expected to keep up with unrealistic timelines and churn out articles, conference presentations, and books at an ever-increasing rate. The problem with neoliberal resiliency narratives, however, is that they obscure the structural causes of the stressors experienced by those most marginalized within, and outside of, university walls—colonialism, anti-Blackness, whiteness, racial capitalism, ableism, saneism, cisheterosexism, and classism.15 I think it is important that we are continually reflecting on how pessimism is a form of resisting and refusing neoliberal logics. Contrary to resilience, “happiness,” and “wellness” discourses, acts of collective refusal create the conditions necessary for radical enclaves of solidarity and collaboration amongst those most marginalized by the university. Our relationship to one another is personal, collective, and political. How can we be happy while we are experiencing systemic injustices? We need solidarity and connection to heal and resist continuing harmful legacies of oppression. Pessimism has the potential to bring about collaboration and complicated forms of solidarity, though not immune to the complexities inherent to working across differences; it fundamentally casts doubt upon the neoliberal university, which opens up space for critical discussions amongst those who doubt it. Political listening is critical to this process. Anna Tsing argues that we should practice “arts of noticing”—that is, moments of looking around as opposed to the capitalist practice of looking forward. Tsing links “latent commons” with Beverley Brown’s argument for political listening.16 Like Tsing’s arts of noticing, Brown defines political listening as the detection of “the traces of not-yet-articulated common agendas.”17 These practices of noticing evoke the need to recognize sites of solidarity through the hints of not yet fully elaborated “common agendas.”18 Ultimately, Tsing puts forth “latent commons” as an alternative to capitalist progress narratives, such as what she critiques as the “hope that progress will lead us to a redemptive and utopian commons.”19 The premise behind Tsing’s conceptualization of latent commons is the recognition that worlds are messy, complex, and uncontainable, whereas institutions try to contain, and separate out the complexities of the world, which Tsing argues must be shared in common. When students are expected to bounce back in order to adapt to and withstand the impacts of systemic violences experienced within higher education spaces, we forego the necessity to care for students without the capacity and/or resources to do so. The radicals among us, however, will recognize this as a moment to refuse capitalist progress narratives that leave so many behind and extend—rather than remove and eradicate—care, connection, and solidarity.
