### Reject it—race is a social construct created and manipulated by racist elites, not a biological reality. Reifying phenotypical race cements bias and discrimination.

**Dr. E. Kate Webb et al. 22**, PhD, Social Justice-Oriented Affective Neuroscientist, postdoctoral fellow in the Neurobiology of Fear Lab at McLean Hospital/Harvard Medical School,  
“Addressing racial and phenotypic bias in human neuroscience methods”,  
<https://www.nature.com/articles/s41593-022-01046-0>

In fact, ==%%marginalized groups%%==—==%%**especially**%%== those ==%%who%%== have ==%%faced%%== ==%%**historical oppression**%%== due to their race, ethnicity, gender and/or sex—==%%are%%== ==%%**not only**%%== ==%%disproportionately%%== ==%%excluded but have%%== also ==%%been%%== actively ==%%harmed by%%== ==%%**intentional and unintentional biases**%%== ==%%in%%== ==%%**medicine**%%==, ==%%**technology**%%== and even ==%%**basic research**%%==. As neuroscientists, ==%%we must be%%== **particularly** ==%%**sensitive**%%== ==%%to how%%== our ==%%**questions**%%==, ==%%**hypotheses**%%== ==%%and%%== ==%%**research methods**%%== may ==%%introduce%%== ==%%**partiality**%%==, because neurological and psychological health is on the line. In this commentary, we sound the alarm on compounding layers of bias that contribute to documented and potential exclusion of racially and ethnically minoritized individuals in psychophysiology research. We explicitly highlight the exclusion of people who have been racialized as Black, because anti-blackness is the backbone of racism and racial bias. As a field, we have a **pivotal need** to **assess our methods** and **conduct research** that directly asks: whose data are deemed ‘unusable’?

Today, although most overt racial discrimination in science is condemned, ==%%**biases propagate**%%== ==%%and%%== ==%%**render harm**%%== against marginalized groups ==%%by%%== ==%%**false assumptions of ‘objectivity’**%%==, implicit discriminatory beliefs and racial disparities that exacerbate these issues. ==%%Particularly alarming is that biased research has the potential to directly%%== **feed back into society**, ==%%creating a cycle that%%== **perpetuates prejudice**. **To be clear:** ==%%race is a sociological construct rather than a biological reality%%==. ==%%The%%== ==%%**phenotypic differences**%%== ==%%that we%%== ==%%**consider**%%== ==%%indicators of race%%==, such as skin color, hair texture, body composition and sweat gland density, in fact ==%%appear in the human species on a continuum that simply%%== ==%%**covaries**%%== ==%%with%%== ==%%**ancestral latitude**%%==. However, race still has meaning in our society: the collection of phenotypes and cultural indicators that we associate with one’s ‘race’ still has power and deeply affects the lived experiences of individuals. This fact is illustrated when descendants of United States slaves (who may have mixed African, European and American ancestry) are grouped together with individuals from the continent of Africa under the term ‘Black/African American’ on government forms. We outline three eras in the history of the use of psychology and neuroscience tools and how understanding of phenotype and race has informed how bias has seeped into practices, especially regarding the adoption of technology.
